>> Transpersonal psychology,
I mean, the "trans,"
the prefix "trans"
there suggests that
there's a recognized need to
go beyond something so "trans"
is beyond.
But it's also equivalent
to another prefix "meta,"
which implies transformation.
So a transformation going
beyond, so the question
is beyond what?
Well, at the time that
transpersonal psychology,
the movement, was founded
and to our own day,
the dominant mode--
the dominant models
of psychology
conceive of the individual as a
more or less isolated atom that
can be studied from the outside.
And there's a preoccupation
with behavior and adaptation
to the dominant values
and social structures that
define our world.
And behind that, there's a
tacit and sometimes explicit
assumption that what
we call mind or psyche
is nothing but the
byproduct of the brain,
and that the brain
in turn is nothing
but a complex neurochemical
and essentially
a mechanistic system.
So dominant psychology
then is still more
or less reductionistic,
atomistic,
and unquestioning in terms
of fundamental values,
particularly the values that
matter most increasingly
in our world that
is facing really,
really serious planetary crises.
So transpersonal
psychology goes beyond
these fundamental assumptions.
But in this way,
it's also going back
to the very origins of
scientific psychology.
And most people, even
most psychologists,
don't realize this,
that the founders
of scientific psychology, Gustav
Theodor Fechner in the 18th--
in the 1800s, mid
1800s, for instance,
the founder of
psychophysics in Europe,
or William James, who taught
the first psychology course here
in the United States,
their psychology
was a transpersonal
psychology to begin with.
They recognized that
the individual is not
an isolated atom
but is, in fact--
the boundaries of the individual
are permeable to a wider field,
we might say, or a wider
participation in we
could call mind
at large or psyche
at large that
actually intersects
with realms, potential
experiences that are even trans
or beyond psyche that
we could call spirit.
So these were the
found-- and Jung,
of course, a little later,
a contemporary of James,
was also a transpersonal
psychologist.
He's known for his concept of
the collective unconscious.
But actually one of
the terms he uses
as a synonym for the
collective unconscious
is the transpersonal
unconscious.
So psychology in its
origins was transpersonal.
But then the wave of
the dominant culture,
which was increasingly
preoccupied
with industrial growth society
and the mechanistic paradigm
that was facilitating
that, colonized psychology
and pushed the
transpersonal impulse
that was there at
the beginning further
and further to the margins.
And it wasn't until the '60s, of
course, the late 60s and 1970,
that transpersonal psychology
as a movement was founded,
or we could say
refounded, and in that
way started recovering the
original transpersonal impulses
of psychology as a whole.
So the context in which
the transpersonal movement
and transpersonal psychology was
founded around 1970, the term
was coined by Stan
Grof but in dialogue
with Abraham Maslow,
Anthony Sutich, and others.
The context, of course, was the
'60s countercultural movement,
which had so radically affected
and transformed the wider
society in so many ways.
And some of the
elements, of course,
entering into that
revolution were
a youth culture that was open to
new ideas, that was unsatisfied
with the status quo,
particularly business as usual
that was only interested in
war and empire and consumerism.
Now this coincided with a
changing of immigration policy
so that there were
more people coming
from East Asia to
the United States
and thus more access to
teachings from the East,
along with a general
interest and curiosity
about contemplative practices,
both East and West mysticism
and so on.
And then a final
element, of course,
was the introduction of LSD and
other mind-altering substances.
But LSD played a
particularly catalyzing role
throughout the '60s.
So all of these things served
sort of synchronistically
to prepare the collective psyche
in particularly the youth,
but not only the literally
young but those who are young at
heart and young in mind,
to be open to radically
new perspectives.
Now, of course, Stan had
his own route into this.
But here in the United
States, centered
around the Esalen community, the
Esalen Institute, and the Bay
Area more generally,
the people interested
in these developments who
were trained in psychology
came together and saw the
need for making explicit
what was already
happening at the leading
edge of psychological research.
There had already
been a transformation
that was called humanistic
psychology in the '50s
and '60s.
But behind the
humanistic movement
was a lingering
presupposition that--
not in all cases--
but that wanted to--
that felt we should limit our
model of psyche and of mind
to the secular realm,
to humanistic values,
as noble as they are.
But that wasn't quite enough.
There wasn't quite
enough room in most
of the humanistic
models to account
for what was arising
spontaneously
in these deep states of
non-ordinary consciousness,
let alone the
multi-milennial tradition
of contemplative
practices and mysticism.
So Stan, Anthony
Sutich, Abraham Maslow,
who was one of the founders
of humanistic psychology,
he had already
suggested the need
for another level of development
beyond self-actualization,
which he called
self-transcendence.
So they all came together and
decided to formally launch
this new movement of
transpersonal psychology
that would make room for the
integration of the realms that
were explicitly excluded from
behaviorism and psychoanalysis,
as well as most
scientifically-oriented
psychology.
Two of the great figures in
transpersonal psychology, Carl
Jung and Stanislav Grof;
start with Jung, for instance,
to begin with.
Now Jung's idea of the
collective unconscious was
an attempt to use as
value-neutral language that
would be acceptable to
the scientific community
to describe the--
or to make room for a
wide range of phenomena
that he experienced
in his own life
and in the lives of his clients
and in his general studies
of culture and so on.
So the body has a
universal structure.
There's an anatomy to the body.
Jung said similarly
there is anatomy-- there
is an anatomy of the psyche.
The psyche, too, has its organs,
which, just like the body,
are universally present in the
relations with one another,
insofar as we are human beings.
So the collective unconscious,
from a scientific point
of view, could be described
as an anatomy of the psyche.
And the organs in this
case, the deep structures,
the universal structures of the
psyche, he called archetypes.
So this is the
scientific inflection
of speaking about the
collective unconscious.
But Jung also sometimes
speaks of these organs
or the archetypes as
gods and goddesses.
And Jung's disciple James
Hillman went even further
and saw no difference between
the idea of archetypes
and gods and goddesses.
But, of course, to speak of
gods and goddesses in the psyche
is anathema to the dominant
scientific paradigm,
so it all depends on
who one is speaking to.
But the other way of
looking at it is this.
The deep potentials
of the psyche,
we can call them
structures or energies.
There's different ways
of speaking about it.
We can take a more conceptual,
typically scientific route
into describing the collective
unconscious of the archetypes,
or we can take a more
metaphorical, symbolic,
expressive route
that actually we
need to take if we're going
to be true to the experience.
If we're doing a phenomenology
of human experience
and we start seeing parallels
in the experiences of people,
not only individuals
at the same time
but between individuals across
time and across cultures,
then in describing
these recurring
patterns and universal
qualities of experience,
it's not enough simply to call
them structures, for instance,
or patterns because, in fact,
these structures or patterns
appear again and
again in ways that we
need to be true to by
describing them as forces,
as gods or spirits, or in using
specific imagery like death
and rebirth.
So rebirth, for instance, is
a universal image experience
across culture, but
it's hard to pin it down
in traditional
scientific language.
People or for all
indigenous cultures
who have specific
names for these beings
that they encounter and they
have personal relationships to,
if we're studying them from
the outside as scientists,
let's say, we might want to
refer to them by another name.
But if we're being true to
what they are experiencing,
we have to use their names.
Now here's another
example, though.
We can say that
we all have minds,
and that's evidently true.
But to say that I am
a mind doesn't capture
who I feel myself to be.
I'm also a person, let's say.
But is person a scientific
category or concept
in the way that a mind
is or that behavior is?
Sure, there are
theories of personality.
But the idea of a
person that we feel
we are immediately
and intuitively
and that we recognize
in other people,
in other persons
we meet, there's
a quality to personhood
that can't be reduced
to standard scientific terms.
And the same is true for the
idea of a god or a spirit.
These are words
that help us have
or that honor our more
immediate embodied participatory
relationship to that
which we're studying.
Now if we want to describe
these things from the outside,
as it were, so that we can
quantify them and measure them,
then sure we can call
them by different names.
But if we want to be true to
psyche, to the experiences that
actually arise, then we
need to take seriously
the names that have always been
given to them by the people who
have these experiences.
And these names have been things
like spirits, gods, goddesses,
or, more particularly,
particular spirits and gods
and goddesses, like Kali or
Crow or the Great Mother.
These images and words
capture something
about the experiences that are
essential to the experiences
themselves.
The collective unconscious
is such a fascinating concept
because it helps us enter
into from the scientific route
into an intuition that we
already have deep down,
that we are not just
isolated individuals.
We're not just atoms
bumping into each other.
But that we all
participate in something
that includes us,
right, and this
is what the
collective unconscious
seeks to honor as a scientific
psychological model.
Now the content of the
collective unconscious,
Jung describes in
terms of archetypes.
And there are, in principle,
an infinite number
of archetypes, the
deep structures,
or universal patterns.
Numbers, for instance,
are archetypal.
They're universal.
Just think of count, 1 to 10.
We see the first 10
numbers universally.
But numbers don't end,
so similarly there's
an infinite variety
of archetypes,
but that can be bewildering.
So Jung also helps us see
that in the infinite plurality
of archetypes, the whole field
of the collective unconscious
is actually coherently organized
around a dynamic vital center
that he called the self.
Now what is the self?
If you do a
phenomenological exploration
of how the self appears
in people's dreams,
for instance, or
cross-culturally
in mythologies and
religious dogmas,
you see that the self is
indistinguishable, Jung said,
from the God image.
What does he mean
by the God image?
He doesn't-- he means specific
images of how the divine have
appeared.
But he also means whatever has
the highest charge, the highest
value, the highest meaning, that
center of meaning and value.
That is the God image.
So the self is
organized around that
which has the greatest, the
deepest meaning and value
and energy.
And what is that, we might say?
Well, Jung and
Stan Grof, I think,
agree in saying that at
the center is life itself.
Now the mystery of life,
which we're embedded in,
which we reproduce moment by
moment every time we breathe,
every pulse of every cell,
is both an expression of life
and serves to produce
and reproduce life.
So this mystery of life is the--
is at the core of what
Jung called the self--
is the central archetype,
which we all share.
And what our task--
our task to understand and
preserve and celebrate life,
this is the highest
value, according to Jung.
And I think implicitly and
even explicitly in Stan's work
as well.
Now where this shows up
most interestingly for me
in Stan's work is
in the centrality
of the phenomenon of birth.
Now birth obviously is
our entry into life.
Now, of course,
we enter into life
at the moment of conception.
But it's only through the actual
birth process to its completion
that we as individuals
become relatively autonomous
relational participants in
this ongoing mystery of life
at an organismic level
and at a psychic--
psychological level.
So, you know, one of the great
contributions of Stan's work
is that he uncovered
the deep structure,
the archetypal pattern, you
might say, of the life process
as it is incarnated
and reincarnated
in us as individuals
and in all individuals.
And that deep archetypal
process of life
that he describes in terms of
the basic perinatal matrices
confirms--
maps onto precisely Jung's--
what Jung had discovered
about the central archetype
of the self, which
Jung also linked
to the archetype of life.
So life, the self, the God
image, the highest value,
birth, the birth process,
these are all part
of a complex mystery that Stan's
work has done so much to help
us engage and understand.
And so all traditional cultures
had and have to the extent
that these indigenous
or traditional cultures
exist and, of course,
they're greatly threatened,
and they've suffered so
much over the last couple
of centuries, but all
traditional societies
have had rites of passage.
And these rites of passage were
used to facilitate and catalyze
key transitions in the
development of the individual
and the cultural, social group
in which the individual is
embedded.
For instance, the most common
ones are rites of passage,
particularly for young
males, at puberty
that signals their transition
from boyhood to adult
male status, where
they can assume
their full responsibility
as members of the group.
So-- but there
are other moments.
In traditional world religions,
for instance, there's
generally a rite of
passage that corresponds
to this threshold of adulthood
that in the Catholic Church,
for instance, is confirmation.
But there's the rite
of baptism as well,
which can be initiated,
as it typically
is these days for many
Christians, in infancy
but which is also
practiced in adulthood.
And then there's the rite,
of course, of marriage,
and there are funeral
rites of passage.
There are rites of passage
around sickness or transition
into special rules, like
being a chief of the clan
or being a priest.
So wherever identity is going
to shift or be transformed
in the direction of a new
and deeper and greater
responsibility, rites of
passage serve to catalyze that.
And now the basic structure of
a rite of passage is threefold.
There is a separation
from the familiar.
And if this is a
puberty rite of passage,
it means separation from
the family, the root family
and particularly the mother,
so from childhood attachments,
separation.
And then a phase, a so-called
liminal phase of initiation,
and this phase almost
always involves
either literal or a symbolic
but deeply experiential
near-death experience.
The physical body and
the emotional life
are put in a situation
of great extremity
that encourages letting
go of prior attachments
and a testing of the inherent
resilience of the body
and the heart and the mind
in the face of adversity
and of life and
death challenges.
And it's at this threshold
of encounter with death
that, if successful, some
kind of transmission occurs.
And in traditional
societies, this
is usually a transmission
from the elders,
who are the keepers
of the wisdom
of their particular culture.
So there might be sacred
objects that are revealed
or stories that are told or
mantras that are communicated.
Whatever it is, if the
individual is successful,
they will now be members of
a new circle of communion
that is consciously
continuous with the ancestors
and with the higher or deeper
beings, the gods and goddesses,
the spirits, the protectors
of the land and so on,
so that they can emerge
in the third phase
and return to their communities
as keepers of these deeper
truths.
So these are the traditional
rites of passage,
which, of course, we've almost
all lost in our own culture.
>> It sounds almost like hazing
in college fraternities is some
feeble or dangerous attempt to
recreate something like that.
>> Yeah, that's right.
Hazing and, of course, we see
it in inner-city gangs, where
usually the males are forced
to put their lives at risk
and unfortunately often
by harming others,
in order to prove their
resilience and worthiness
to become members of the group.
Yeah, so this is
a deeply ingrained
archetypal expectation
on the part
of individuals, when they
reach a certain level
of potential maturity.
So if we don't
have the, we might
say, spiritually inflected
and culturally inflected
in the direction
of life support,
then these impulses will
take other forms, of course.
Now, I mean, a fascinating
thing about rites
of passage in relation
to Stan's work
is that the deep structure
of birth that he uncovered
replicates the deep structure
of rites of passage.
And, in fact, what we
realize, particularly
through Stan's
work, is that birth
itself is not only
a rite of passage
but is perhaps the
universal rite of passage
that we all go through to
bring us into the web of life,
and not only of biological life
but of specifically human life.
Because as we know, human beings
can't survive the birth process
unless they are immediately
taken up in circles of care
by whoever the
primary caregiver is--
historically, usually,
it's the mother;
it doesn't need to be
the biological mother--
and the wider community in which
these caregivers are given.
So all of us have undergone
this initial rite of passage.
And perhaps it's
through that experience
that we come into the
world knowing deeply
that if we are to succeed
in the ongoing actualization
of our potentials,
whatever they are
as individuals, throughout the
life cycle for however long we
live, we will need
to undergo repeatedly
similar rites of passage,
similar births, which
are always deaths.
So birth is always a death,
and death is, gods willing,
followed by a birth.
In my own experience
and of those
that I've spoken to about
their own similar experiences,
it seems that in
moments of extremity
that the natural response is to
contract-- to contract in fear.
And the body contracts.
I mean, the breathing
gets shallower.
The diaphragm tightens.
The shoulders tighten and so on.
It's a natural response.
But so this contraction and
fear reinforces the sense
that we are a separate--
only a separate
self, a separate self
that has no essential
connection to anything else.
In these initiatory
experiences, which
can include illness and
accidents and all kinds
of physical injury and
emotional trauma and so on,
we will quite naturally
contract as an initial response
to preserve our integrity.
But at a certain
point, the contraction
becomes counterproductive.
If we take it to the
extreme, for instance,
we stop breathing.
Now the body has its innate
response at a certain point.
Usually that if we--
we can't stop breathing
forever because we'll die.
So, ultimately, we have
to let go and breathe in.
If we're lucky in these
intense experiential encounters
with the deep psyche,
at a certain moment,
the contraction will let go.
And that's a moment of grace.
When we let go,
what seems to happen
is that we find that contrary
to our greatest fear,
we are always already held
within a wider web of life in--
we're held in a wider
embrace of interbeing,
which is life itself.
Some people call it spirit also.
And-- but, unfortunately,
for some of us,
we can't have that
experience until we've
hung on for dear life
for as long as we can.
And so Jung talks about how
when we ignore the deeper
promptings of the psyche, of
the collective unconscious,
they tend to come upon us
from the outside as fate.
And now if we look at
our shared planetary
situation at the
moment, we are really
balancing on the precipice.
We're collectively involved in
an unanticipated, unrehearsed
rite of passage, hurtling
towards a near-death experience
with the mass
extinction of species
underway, with the threats
to biological diversity,
with the ever-present
threat of thermonuclear war
along with other
conventional forms of war,
civilizational
collapse, and so on.
These are all
mounting, interfering--
mutually interfering
reinforcing crises
that were participating
in and that we've
been creating as a species and
the industrialized nations,
the cultures that
they have promoted,
in particular, have been causing
without really knowing it.
Now the dominant worldview
of industrial growth society
that has brought the
planet to the precipice
has systematically ignored the
deeper dimensions of psyche,
the archetypal
dimensions, spirit even,
at the core of which is
the ethical responsibility
to engage consciously this
numinous mystery of life
and the initiation
into life, the repeated
initiation into
life, that involves
an encounter with our
own mortality and death.
So it's almost as if that by
ignoring that progressively
throughout the modern period,
the whole planet has been
brought, dragged by its
hair, to a forced initiation
on a planetary scale.